---
tags: [ReactJs]
title: 06. Lifecycle Methods
created: '2023-07-06T13:57:52.068Z'
modified: '2023-07-06T13:58:03.410Z'
---

# 06\. Lifecycle Methods

In functional components, React provides a set of built-in hooks that allow you to perform lifecycle-like operations. These hooks let you execute code at specific points during the component's lifecycle. Here are some commonly used lifecycle methods and their functional component equivalents using React Hooks:

1. **ComponentDidMount**: This method is invoked immediately after a component is mounted (inserted into the DOM). It is commonly used for initial setup and fetching data.

Functional Equivalent: Use the `useEffect` hook with an empty dependency array to mimic `componentDidMount` behavior.

```js
import React, { useEffect } from 'react';

function MyComponent() {
  useEffect(() => {
    // Code to run after component mount
    // Fetch data, initialize subscriptions, etc.
    return () => {
      // Cleanup code (optional)
      // Unsubscribe, clear intervals, etc.
    };
  }, []);

  // Rest of the component
}
```

2. **ComponentDidUpdate**: This method is called after the component's update is reflected in the DOM. It allows you to perform actions based on prop or state changes.

Functional Equivalent: Use the `useEffect` hook with dependencies to execute code when specific props or state values change.

```js
import React, { useEffect } from 'react';

function MyComponent({ data }) {
  useEffect(() => {
    // Code to run when 'data' prop changes
    // Perform actions based on prop changes
  }, [data]);

  // Rest of the component
}
```

3. **ComponentWillUnmount**: This method is invoked just before a component is unmounted (removed from the DOM). It is typically used for cleanup tasks like canceling network requests or clearing intervals.

Functional Equivalent: Return a cleanup function from the `useEffect` hook to perform cleanup when the component unmounts.

```js
import React, { useEffect } from 'react';

function MyComponent() {
  useEffect(() => {
    // Code to run after component mount

    return () => {
      // Cleanup code
      // Cancel network requests, clear intervals, etc.
    };
  }, []);

  // Rest of the component
}
```

React Hooks allow you to achieve the same behavior as class component lifecycle methods in a more concise and modular manner. The `useEffect` hook is versatile and can cover various use cases related to component lifecycle. By leveraging the power of hooks, you can handle component initialization, updates, and cleanup effectively within functional components.
